This is Eric Norgello talking with Evelyn Butler
at Austin City Planning Department concerning
planning history in Austin. You've been with
Austin City Planning Department for how long now,
Ms. Butler? About 25 and a half years. 25 and a half
years, all right. And prior to that, had you worked
in any other planning departments? Has all your
experience been with Austin? All of it has been
with Austin. I did work one summer while I was at the
University of Texas with the Planning Department
here in Austin. Beginning with these preliminary
questions, which we are just now looking over,
could you tell me when the first legislative
authorization of a comprehensive plan was in
Austin? When you're talking about legislative
authorization, I'm sure that you consider that to
be the state. And I do not have that date. And the
same would go for legislative authorization of
planning, not just the document for Austin. Well,
we have the city charter, which established the
planning commission and the authority of the
planning commission to authorize
and have a master plan prepared. I don't have that
exact date, but I might be able to pick that up for
you. I do have the charter here. And
they have the amendments here, but I don't think
they have the date on when that first went into
effect. But it was authorized by the city charter.
Throughout the years, Austin City has adopted a
number of comprehensive plans. Could you tell me
what the dates of these various plans were? There
have been a number of plans that have been
prepared. There was no comprehensive plan
adopted until June 8, 1961. We had pieces that were
adopted. We had pieces that were used some, but
were never adopted. We had a plan that was prepared
by Cook and Fowler in 19... 27, 28, and I think that
that was used as a guide even though there was no
official action taken that I can find. Then in 1950
there was a plan that was generally prepared by
Farron Granger and I think as a result of the work
that they did the City Council adopted a
thoroughfare plan and that just set out the
widths, the right-of-way widths and locations of
a limited number of thoroughfares. After that
date, nothing was done until the city authorized
consultants to be hired to prepare a new
comprehensive plan or master plan for Austin.
Work was started on it in the mid-50s, and the work
was completed, I believe, in 1958. The plan went
through a series of public hearings. It was
modified substantially before it was adopted in
1961.
After that date, we have ended up with a new
comprehensive plan But prior to that plan coming
about, there were two amendments to the
transportation section of the 61 plan. The
highway department jointly with the city and the
county conducted a transportation study and this
transportation study resulted in the expressway
and major arterial plan for Austin which replaced
the 61 thoroughfare plan and it was first adopted
in 67 and it was updated and adopted again with
revisions in 1969. That plan has been used up until
The new comprehensive plan came out, and we have
now a roadway, Austin Metropolitan roadway plan
that was adopted just a few months ago.
Let's see. You mentioned that the adopted
comprehensive plans in Austin have been revised
from time to time. Could you tell me how this
revision takes place? Any applicant or city
agency who might feel that change is in order for
the plan, whether the 61 plan covered land use as
well as the transportation system. Whenever we
had a proposal for deviation from that plan
covering a fairly major area, we came through with
what we called a master plan change.
accepted an application from whoever wanted to
change the plan. We prepared maps. We sent out
memos to all the departments to find out how that
would affect their area of responsibility. Then
we held the public hearing. We would have the
individual notices to people immediately around
the area. and newspaper notice for the hearing.
The hearing would be held before the Planning
Commission and then their recommendation would
be passed on to the City Council and the City
Council would take action.
We
have had a series of changes both in land use and in
thoroughfare locations. Is there any
systematic, periodic review of the city's
comprehensive plan? It was scheduled to be
reviewed annually, but it was not followed
through in that sense for the simple reason that as
people saw problems with the plan, the amendments
were brought up whenever the need arose rather
than waiting for an annual review. The new plan,
there will be I think review of that, I think we'll
be following a schedule in regard to reevaluating
the new comprehensive plan. So Austin's found
that it's more feasible to revise a plan as needed
rather than on a regularly scheduled basis? Not
necessarily. We have always felt that review
would be the best because that way then you can look
at the overall picture rather than at just one
area. Now, there are some modifications that
would not call for a complete review, but there are
others that can be very, very influential
on other areas, and it should not be done on a
piecemeal basis. How is this review undertaken,
then? The review... The process itself. The
process itself would be that if we had an area that
was developing with development pressures that
would not, say, meet the comprehensive plan. And
we would feel as though that maybe the
comprehensive plan did not take some of these
things into consideration, possibly because we
did not have the knowledge at the time it was
prepared, or possibly because we've had other
pressures from outside investments. that were
not known at the time the plan was prepared. I think
that this can be evidenced by the number of
environmental concerns that have been raised in
recent years. We have come up with a series of new
ordinances that have covered, say, our Lake
Austin watershed in order to maintain our safe
water supply because Lake Austin provides Austin
with the drinking water. We have some very
sensitive aquifers in the Austin area and we have
had a series of ordinances that are
key to the environmental issue and the
maintaining of the aquifers so that we do not end up
with pollutants entering the aquifer. So in those
areas, even though the plans as we've gone through
them through the years, some of this information
was not readily available. We've had new
technology. We've had new interests as far as
environmental concerns.
have been raised. And so I think we ended up, even
though our plan, the 61 plan, I think, was intended
to go into the 80s. And of course, we didn't adopt
the new plan, I don't believe, until 79. No, let's
see, it might have been early 1980. But we'd had so
many changes in the interim that a number of the
land uses, for instance, were really no longer
valid.
Would you say that looking at past history of
planning here, that Austin conducts its planning
in a comprehensive manner, or would you
characterize it in a different type of way, such as
incremental planning, radical planning,
response to crises, or something like that? Well,
I don't think that we can put it into one specific
category. Austin, I think, has made every effort
to go in for the comprehensive planning for the
city. We have... had the review of, for instance,
the plans, as I've mentioned, the thoroughfare
plan, and we have tried to do that on an entire city
and area-wide basis. We have worked with other
communities that abut our ETJ or where we might
have overlaps of ETJ. We have worked with them on a
long-range concept to where we can work together.
I think that we generally would fall into the
category of the comprehensive rather than the
either radical or incremental. Now there are
times when we have, say, some development
pressures when an industry wants to come in. And I
feel as though that that is where we... might
consider the incremental for the simple reason
that if the industry had not been anticipated in
the early stages, then we find that that industry
can have quite an impact on the community. And we
many times have a very short review time of how that
industry would impact the community. We make
every effort to go into review of the utility
situation, the traffic situation that would be
generated by it, and the effect on existing
development. And I think that the work that has
been done in regard to a number of these industries
has been fairly comprehensive. Do you happen to
recall when the first zoning ordinance was in
Austin? I think that it was in the mid-20s. I don't
have the exact date for you, and I would like to get
that for you. Would you happen to know if zoning
ordinances happened to be enacted before the city
had a comprehensive plan? I think they were. What
would be the basis of that kind of authority for
zoning then? That, I can't give you the history. I
wish I could. But I think the idea was that there
would be certain places that businesses were
located on major streets and I think that some of
the early zoning took place by strip zoning
because they felt as though this is where the
activity would take place. What administrative
procedures and planning program elements does
your community presently have for implementing
community plans? What do you mean by community
plans? Comprehensive plans. All right. The
implementation of the comprehensive plan goes
back to zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, the capital improvements program,
and then there are a number of individual plans
like public facilities plan, fire service, or I'm
not sure what the title is, but fire station
location plan, and we have a parks and recreation
plan. And all of these tie back into the CIP
program, and the funding that would be required to
implement these plans. When did Austin City first
establish a planning department?
I believe the planning department was
established in 1949 or 50.
And at present, could you tell me approximately
how many professional planners the city employs?
At this time?
I'd have to check the number. I think that I
could... Could I give this to you a little later in
the interview? Sure. Or could you cut this off, and
I think I can get... The number of planners,
professional planners, that we have on staff now,
including our administration, would be 24, and
this can fluctuate 24, 26, right in that area
because we are short two at the present time. And
this
covers advanced planning and current planning.
Has the size of the department over the years
expanded to meet the needs of the city? We had a
little expansion, not very much. Our workload has
continued to grow, and actually our staff has not
grown as much as our workload has grown. So you
would say you had approximately the same size
staff five years ago? Oh, it might vary two or
three, not very many. We were authorized a new
person just within the last couple of months
because we have added a new section to the zoning
ordinance which calls for review of all site plans
for development along some of our major roadways.
We also had the Barton Creek ordinance which was
implemented and we were authorized a new position
to help implement that ordinance. So we have
expanded a little, but not as rapidly as our
workload has expanded. Could you give me some
information on the organizational structure of
the planning department here? We actually have
two sections within the department at this time.
We have the current planning section and the
advanced planning section. And we consider the
administration, our director, assistant
director, and the supporting staff for that
administrative function. The advanced planning
section normally carries through, say, the
writing and preparation of the comprehensive
plan, and they are responsible for a number of
studies in relation to implementing that plan.
The current planning section takes care of the
day-to-day operation. The current planning
section actually is divided up into three
subsections. subdivision processing,
subdivision design, and zoning. Now, I do have
another more or less support section for both of
those, which is the drafting section. And that
gives me an idea on chain of command within each of
the sections. Right. But within the current
planning, there are, in other words, all the
day-to-day operations. Now, we do have some
crossover, even though the drafting section is
under the supervision of current planning. It
still does some work for advanced planning.
Advanced planning carries out some studies that
benefit us. They have an artist on their staff, and
so some preparation in regard to some of our
publications might be done by advanced planning,
so we do have quite a bit of crossover. Could you
give me an idea as to relationship of the planning
department and its legislative body, that is the
Planning Commission, and what type of member
within the department acts as liaison and some
ideas to communication within the two bodies? All
right. Actually, the Planning Department is the
staff for the Planning Commission. Mr. Lilly, our
director, is the executive secretary of the
Planning Commission, and we're responsible for
maintaining all the records, minutes, and the
support for the public hearings conducted by the
Planning Commission. So, actually, Mr. Lilly
appears at, I'd say, the majority of the Planning
Commission meetings. We do have other staff. We
have subdivision processing planner appearing
in regard to subdivisions. We have several zoning
staff members appearing for the Planning
Commission meetings that hold the public
hearings on zoning, special permits, the
principal roadway area, historic zoning, which
also goes through the Landmark Commission.
How would you describe the relationship of the
Planning Department and various citizen groups
that try to impact the advice that's given to the
Planning Commission? I think it's excellent. We,
of course, have had some concerns raised by
citizen groups at times that they feel as though
they don't get as much information as they would
like to have.
send out information to them. We have a list of
neighborhood associations that I think total
close to 100. And we notify the neighborhood
association affected on each zoning case if there
is one. I mean, if there is an association, they're
given a notice just like a property owner would be
given notice. How well organized are these
neighborhood action groups? Some of them are very
well organized. Others have organized as a result
of, say, a zoning issue that they are unhappy with.
And so that... many times initiates the
development of the neighborhood association. Do
you find that in your contact with these
neighborhood groups, they seem to be interested
in specific neighborhood aerial interests, or
they have a broader perspective, let's say a
comprehensive view of the city and its city's
needs in that? I would say that a few of them have
indicated that they have an interest in the entire
city. There are some that have appeared on issues
that are outside of their immediate
neighborhood, but there are others who are just
very neighborhood-oriented and they're
concerned only when their own area is threatened.
Within any city, significant events
historically will impact the city in many ways,
planning being one of them. Looking at some of the
different types of events that can impact a city's
planning, could you tell me something about the
founding of the city of Boston and whether it was
planned and how planning was later affected by its
founding? Well, I think that when Austin was first
laid out, we had some very... This was when? I wish
you had not asked me that question. In checking
records, I find that it was actually, the city was
incorporated in December of 1839.
Do you happen to know if the city was planned at that
time, whether there was any kind of a layout for
streets or design? There was a layout. I think that
that might have come a little bit later, because I
vaguely remember a map that's labeled 1840. that
shows the downtown area. It shows out the laying
out of Congress, East Avenue, West Avenue, and the
original outlocks for the city of Austin. And I
believe that's, it might be dated 1839, but
somewhere or other I feel as though, and it could be
tied to the date that it was officially built.
settled, and I could get that information for you
and maybe provide you with a copy of that map. Has
the city of Austin been influenced in a planning
sense by city fairs or county fairs or larger
expositions or major conventions over the years?
Not in, I don't think, a major sense. I think that
there were some celebrations in the early days,
but I don't think that they were that extensive,
and I just don't recall enough history on that to be
able to respond adequately. During the frontier
period, could you tell me what functions the city
of Austin performed in relationship to the state
or to the West? Of course, the capital of the state.
That's the primary function. I think that because
it had a very central location being located on the
Colorado River, It was one of the trading posts for
a lot of areas around Austin. I feel as though that
with the railroad coming to Austin, it really
functioned as a hub for Central Texas. That's my
next question on the coming of the railroad. How
did this impact planning in Austin? Well, one
thing, because our transportation system was
keyed more to railroad than anything else, the
very best homes in Austin were built close to the
railroad. That's not the way it is today, but it was
then, and we have some very old historic homes that
were constructed close to the railroad facility.
During world wars, typically, United States
governments have established military bases
that didn't exist previously. An influx of
population will impact the area. Did Austin have
any problems with this and have to plan for that?
Austin actually, I think, participated in as much
as I understand that the Bergstrom Air Force Base,
that the land was given by the city of Austin to the
government for the base. And I think that there's
always been a very good relationship between the
city of Austin and the Air Force Base. We have, of
course, a number of people who have been brought
here as a result of it, and it has had, I think, a very
long-range effect on Austin, inasmuch as so many
people who come to Austin by way of Bergstrom find
that Austin is one of the most delightful places to
live. And when they retire, even though they might
have been transferred to another section of the
country, We have a number of people, military
people, who have come back to Austin to retire. It
also affects our employment. This department has
a number of retired Air Force
people working in it at the present time. They have
gone on to start a second profession after they
have completed their training well, tour of duty
or whatever you might want to call it. And they have
started a second career, and they are, I think,
functioning very well in the employment market as
well as in the retirement. Did the number of people
coming with Bergstrom Air Force Base entail any
special planning needs as regards that area of the
city and service provision?
I'm sure it did affect a good bit of planning in the
early days. It was before I came here, and I'm not
sure how much of an impact it had at that time when it
first came. In later years, it has affected
housing development because the personnel had to
be on call so that they could reach the base within a
certain number of minutes, I believe. And so I
think that it helped increase the population in
the South Austin area. I think that is another
reason that since we had so many military people
living in that area, there was a delay in getting as
many, say, shopping centers in South Austin as we
had in North Austin and other areas because a lot of
their shopping was done on the base, and even
though we had the residential development, The
commercial development really did not quite meet
the same standards as it did in other areas. Now, I
don't think that that is quite the case anymore
because as our population has grown, I don't think
the Bergstrom population has grown as fast as the
other population, so that's beginning to balance
out. Can you see even at this point or the point
where you... in the 1950s when you joined the
department, any transportation needs that were
impacted by coming to the Air Force Base,
thoroughfares widening? Well, we did have, for
instance, Riverside Drive was a county lane, and
that was one of the main streets that was used by
Bergstrom personnel to come into Austin. And, of
course, I think that More than likely, the
Montopolis interchange had the need for it, was
generated partially by Bergstrom. And I think
that the need for building up Riverside Drive was
partially by Bergstrom. But again, it's just a
small percentage in the overall. The Great
Depression in the 1930s and the New Deal programs
that were enacted to deal with the problem had a
great impact on many cities. For example, WPA
projects, funding for planning and development.
What role did this play in planning in Austin? The
only thing that I can give you without doing some
research is that we did have a number of WPA
projects. I think that some of the facilities out
in Zilker Park were built at that time.
I know that there were a number of things that
happened throughout Austin during that period,
and I do not have the exact locations, but we did
benefit, I think, indirectly from the WPA
activity. Can you think of any public buildings or
city buildings that were constructed as a result
of WPA funding? Well, I think the ones in Zilker
Park are the main ones that I can think of. City
administration buildings or city hall or
anything like that? I don't think so. I don't
believe so. The urban renewal era in late 60s and
early to mid 1970s, what impact did that have on
planning in Austin and development here? Well, I
would say that it had quite a bit of impact inasmuch
as urban renewal was used in a number of areas. We
had a series of projects. One was called the
Bracken Ridge Urban Renewal Area. That was for the
expansion of Bracken Ridge Hospital and the
related area. We used urban renewal for the
expansion of the university. Then there were
several projects in East Austin that did not tie
into the public agency need. that were for the
neighborhoods.
I think urban renewal has mixed
reception here in Austin.
We had a number of people who were
displaced in the university area. They would have
been displaced whether it had come under urban
renewal or otherwise because the university did
have the right of eminent domain and they could
have expanded and the legislature had already
decided that the property would be acquired. And
one reason that urban renewal was used...